# SMILES-Alignment
Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System-Alignment

# Article Link
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-025-06278-y

# Overview
The Python program SMILES-Alignment is a command-line executable program that generates a global alignment of small organic molecules based on their Gasteiger charges. There are two methods through which the alignment can be created: All_vs_All_Alignment and Paired_Alignment. All_vs_All_Alignment procures SMILES representations of molecular structures of each molecule in the metabolic pathway, from which it computes the Gasteiger charges, quantities that encapsulate the relative electronegativities of atoms. The obtained charges are aggregated into a master list containing all charges in all molecules. Then, non-finite values (NaN and infinities) are filtered out and the corresponding atoms are removed from the analysis. Paired_Scoring.py is dedicated to the generation of a paired scoring matrix. The scoring function within this structure is based on the differences in Gasteiger charges between paired atoms. The objective is to uncover any underlying trends or patterns exclusive to these specific atomic pairs, such as all Carbon-Carbon (C-C), Carbon-Oxygen (C-O), etc., across all molecules in the database. By comparing these charge differences across a wide range of molecules, the study aims to identify potential trends or phenomena that might enhance our understanding of the behavior of these atoms within the realm of metabolic reactions that the All vs. All scoring matrix is not capable of. For each atom pair, a scoring matrix similar to that in All_vs_All_Scoring.py is created, with the difference that it bases its scores on the specific pair's charge differences. If used for inference, this program can help us understand when a linear metabolic pathway becomes a cyclic metabolic pathway and at what point a linear pathway can never become a cyclic pathway.

# User instructions
To run either All_vs_All_Alignment.py or Paired_Alignment.py, a text file with molecules in SMILES format must be generated and placed in the same folder as the program (you can just download the text file in the repository). Then, depending on the global alignment generator the user wants to use, run either All_vs_All_Scoring.py or Paired_Scoring.py. A pickle file will be used to store the results. If a pickle file is already in the folder, then the program will overwrite the previous content; if not, a new pickle file will be generated. Once the results of these programs are dumped into the pickle file, run the global alignment generator program of choice. When either All_vs_All_Alignemnt or Paired_Alignment is run, a CSV file is generated that lists all possible combinations of the gap open and gap extension penalties and the corresponding alignment scores. Moreover, each program produces two text files: one that has the alignment scores and aligned molecules for all the penalty combinations and another that has the the alignment scores and aligned molecules for the penalty combination that produced the highest score.
